<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
  <head>
    <title>Jonathan McGee - Resume</title>
  </head>
  <body class="hResume">
    <div class="banner">
      <div class="vcard">
        <h1 class="fn">Jonathan McGee</h1>
        <p class="links"><a class="email" href="mailto:continuing.search@etherealwake.com">continuing.search@etherealwake.com</a> | <a class="url" href="http://etherealwake.com/">http://etherealwake.com</a></p>
      </div>
      <p class="summary">Private pilot and electrical engineer with experience in embedded systems, hardware design, and signal processing.</p>
    </div>

    <div id="skills">
      <h2>Skills &amp; Abilities</h2>
      <ul>
        <li>Application Engineering</li>
        <li>Assembly</li>
        <li>C</li>
        <li>C++</li>
        <li>C#</li>
        <li>Embedded Systems</li>
        <li>Ethernet</li>
        <li>FPGA</li>
        <li>Hardware Design</li>
        <li>Linux</li>
        <li>Low Power</li>
        <li>Microcontrollers</li>
        <li>Private Pilot</li>
        <li>Signal Processing</li>
        <li>TCP/IP</li>
        <li>UDP</li>
        <li>VHDL</li>
        <li>Windows</li>
      </ul>
    </div>

    <div id="experience">
      <h2>Experience</h2>
      <ol class="vcalendar">
        <li class="experience vevent">
          <h3><span class="summary">Hardware Engineer</span>, <span class="location">Google[x]</span></h3>
          <h4><abbr class="dtstart" title="2014-07">July 2014</abbr> - Present</h4>
          <div class="description">
            <p>Circuit design, <abbr title="Printed Circuit Board">PCB</abbr> layout, and firmware development for avionics systems as part of <a href="http://www.google.com/loon/">Project Loon.</a> Primary focus on sensor systems.</p>
          </div>
        </li>
        <li class="experience vevent">
          <h3><span class="summary">Research Engineer</span>, <span class="location">Laboratory for Physical Sciences</span></h3>
          <h4><abbr class="dtstart" title="2008-05">May 2008</abbr> - <abbr class="dtend" title="2014-07">July 2014</abbr></h4>
          <div class="description">
            <p>Considerable independence was demonstrated through all phases of project lifetime: research, design, and implementation. Regularly handled communication with customers, leadership, and vendors.</p>
            <p>Developed Linux-based C++ software for signal processing applications.  Made extensive use of <a class="skill" rel="tag" href="http://openmp.org/">OpenMP</a> for parallelization and <a class="skill" rel="tag" href="http://think-async.com/">Asio</a> for asynchronous network I/O. Designed algorithms based on Bayesian inference for purposes of pattern identification and estimation.</p>
            <p>Programmed stand-alone and PC-based Xilinx FPGA systems for signal processing applications. Development focused on implementing Ethernet (1G and 10G) and UDP/IP for data exchange, fixed-point and floating-point pipelined computations.</p>
            <p>Designed, built, and programmed embedded radio systems based on the <a class="skill" rel="tag" href="http://www.ti.com/lsds/ti/microcontroller/16-bit_msp430/overview.page">Texas Instruments MSP430</a> and <a class="skill" rel="tag" href="http://www.ti.com/product/cc1101">Chipcon radios</a>. Emphasis was on physical miniaturization and minimizing power consumption. Software development was bare-metal in C++, supported by limited use of assembly to construct a rudimentary threaded Real Time Operating System (RTOS). Prototypes have operated autonomously in the field for multiple years without need of servicing.</p>
          </div>
        </li>
        <li class="experience vevent">
          <h3><span class="summary">Visiting Scientist</span>, <span class="location">University Research Foundation</span></h3>
          <h4><abbr class="dtstart" title="2007-08-01">August 2007</abbr> - <abbr class="dtend" title="2008-05-01">May 2008</abbr></h4>
          <p class="description">Embedded circuit design and development (C/C++) with the MSP430 and Chipcon radio.  Work continued with the Laboratory for Physical Sciences.</p>
        </li>
        <li class="experience vevent">
          <h3><span class="summary">Research Assistant</span>, <span class="location">University of Maryland, College Park</span></h3>
          <h4><abbr class="dtstart" title="2004-06-01">June 2004</abbr> - <abbr class="dtend" title="2007-08-01">August 2007</abbr></h4>
          <p class="description">Graduate work focused on the design and construction of electromechanical photonic components.  Considerable work in the modeling of physical systems.</p>
        </li>
        <li class="experience vevent">
          <h3><span class="summary">Undergraduate Researcher</span>, <span class="location">University of Maryland, College Park</span></h3>
          <h4><abbr class="dtstart" title="2003-06-01">June 2003</abbr> - <abbr class="dtend" title="2004-06-01">May 2004</abbr></h4>
          <p class="description">Implemented network routing daemons in C/C++, including the creation of Linux kernel modules.  Implemented digital and mixed-signal hardware simulation in C as part of the <a href="http://www.hynet.umd.edu/research/atemu/">ATEMU project</a>.</p>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </div>

    <div id="education">
      <h2>Education</h2>
      <ol class="vcalendar">
        <li class="education vevent">
          <h3 class="location">University of Maryland, College Park, MD</h3>
          <h4><span class="summary">Electrical Engineering – Masters of Science</span>, <abbr class="dtstart" title="2004-08-01">August 2004</abbr> - <abbr class="dtend" title="2008-05-01">May 2008</abbr></h4>
          <p class="description">Major in Microelectronics.  Minor in Electrophysics.</p>
        </li>
        <li class="education vevent">
          <h3 class="location">University of Maryland, College Park, MD</h3>
          <h4><span class="summary">Electrical Engineering – Bachelor of Science</span>, <abbr class="dtstart" title="2000-08-01">August 2000</abbr> - <abbr class="dtend" title="2004-05-01">May 2004</abbr></h4>
          <p class="description">Senior focus in Microelectronics.</p>
        </li>
      </ol>
    </div>

    <div id="hobby">
      <h2>Hobby Experience</h2>
      <ul>
        <li>Considerable experience with C#, <a class="skill" rel="tag" href="http://www.visualstudio.com/">Visual Studio</a>, and other Microsoft development tools.</li>
        <li>Considerable experience with <a class="skill" rel="tag" href="http://freebsd.org/">FreeBSD</a> and <a class="skill" rel="tag" href="http://openbsd.org/">OpenBSD</a>.</li>
        <li>Limited experience in 3D graphics programming (primarily DirectX).</li>
      </ul>
    </div>

    <div id="aviation">
      <h2>Aviation</h2>
      <ul>
        <li>Private Pilot’s License (<abbr title="Airplane, Single Engine, Land">ASEL</abbr>), May 2012</li>
        <li class="affiliation vcard">Member <a class="url" href="http://aopa.org/"><abbr class="fn org" title="Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association">AOPA</abbr></a>, February 2012-Present</li>
        <li class="affiliation vcard">Member <a class="url" href="http://eaa.org/"><abbr class="fn org" title="Experimental Aircraft Association">EAA</abbr></a>, July 2011-Present</li>
      </ul>
    </div>

    <div id="publications">
      <h2>Publications</h2>
      <ul>
        <li class="conference">M. Khbeis, J. McGee, and R. Ghodssi, "<cite><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SENSOR.2009.5285377">Development of a simplified hybrid ambient low frequency, low intensity vibration energy scavenger system</a></cite>," in <i>Proc. Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and Microsystems Conference</i>, 2009, pp. 525-528.</li>
        <li class="thesis">J. McGee, "<cite><a href="http://hdl.handle.net/1903/8566">Monolithic In-Plane Tunable Optical Filter</a></cite>," M.S. thesis, Deptment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, 2008.</li>
        <li class="journal">B. Morgan, J. McGee, and R. Ghodssi, "<cite><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JMEMS.2006.886035">Automated Two-Axes Optical Fiber Alignment Using Grayscale Technology</a></cite>," <i>Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems</i>, vol. 16, pp. 102-110, Feb 2007.</li>
        <li class="conference">N. Siwak, J. McGee, and R. Ghodssi, "<cite><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LSSA.2006.250369">Indium Phosphide Optical MEMS for Chemical and Biological Sensing</a></cite>," in <i>Proc.  Life Science Systems and Applications Workshop</i>, 2006, pp. 1-2.</li>
        <li class="conference">N. Siwak, M.W. Pruessner, J. McGee, and R. Ghodssi, "<cite><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISDRS.2005.1596086">Indium phosphide MEMS for integrated bio-sensing</a></cite>," in <i>Proc. Semiconductor Device Research Symposium</i>, 2005, pp. 264-265.</li>
        <li class="conference">J. McGee, N. Siwak, B. Morgan, and R. Ghodssi, "<cite><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ISDRS.2005.1595975">In-Plane Indium Phosphide Tunable Optical Filter Using Ridge Waveguilds</a></cite>," in <i>Proc. Semiconductor Device Research Symposium</i>, 2005, pp. 56-57.</li>
        <li class="conference">M. Datta, M.W. Pruessner, K. Amarnath, J. McGee, S. Kanakaraju, and R. Ghodssi, "<cite><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MEMSYS.2005.1453874">Wavelength-selective integrated optical MEMS filter in InP</a></cite>," in <i>Proc. Micro Electro Mechanical Systems</i>, 2005, pp. 88-91.</li>
        <li class="journal">K.A. Jones, P.B. Shah, T.S. Zheleva, M.H. Ervin, M.A. Derenge, J.A. Freitas, S. Harmon, J. McGee, and R.D. Vispute, "<cite><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/1.1798404">Effects of high-temperature anneals on 4H-SiC Implanted with Al or Al and Si</a></cite>," <i>Journal of Applied Physics</i>, vol. 96, pp. 5613-5618, Nov 2004.</li>
        <li class="conference">J. Polley, D. Blazakis, J. McGee, D. Rusk, and J.S. Baras, "<cite><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SAHCN.2004.1381912">ATEMU: a fine-grained sensor network simulator</a></cite>," in <i>Proc.  Sensor and Ad Hoc Communications and Networks</i>, 2004, pp. 145-152.</li>
        <li class="conference">J. McGee, M. Karir, and J.S. Baras, "<cite><a href="http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-24643-5_12">Implementing Ad Hoc to Terrestrial Network Gateways</a></cite>," in <i>Proc. Wired/Wireless Internet Communications</i>, 2004, pp. 132-142.</li>
      </ul>
    </div>
  </body>
</html>
