---
# Index
url: /error/410.html
weight: 410
# Metadata
title: Gone
subtitle: HTTP/1.1 410 Gone
# Originally Appeared in draft-ietf-http-v10-spec-00
date: 1995-03-08
---

> ## 6.5.9.  410 Gone
>
> The 410 (Gone) status code indicates that access to the target
> resource is no longer available at the origin server and that this
> condition is likely to be permanent.  If the origin server does not
> know, or has no facility to determine, whether or not the condition
> is permanent, the status code 404 (Not Found) ought to be used
> instead.
>
> The 410 response is primarily intended to assist the task of web
> maintenance by notifying the recipient that the resource is
> intentionally unavailable and that the server owners desire that
> remote links to that resource be removed.  Such an event is common
> for limited-time, promotional services and for resources belonging to
> individuals no longer associated with the origin server's site.  It
> is not necessary to mark all permanently unavailable resources as
> "gone" or to keep the mark for any length of time -- that is left to
> the discretion of the server owner.
>
> A 410 response is cacheable by default; i.e., unless otherwise
> indicated by the method definition or explicit cache controls (see
> [Section 4.2.2 of [RFC7234]](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7234#section-4.2.2)).

<cite>From [RFC 7231 Section 6.5.9](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7231#section-6.5.9)</cite>

> ## 410 Gone
>
> The requested resource is no longer available at the server and no
> forwarding address is known. This condition should be considered
> permanent. Clients with link editing capabilities are encouraged to
> delete references to the Request-URI (after user approval). If the
> server does not know (or has no facility to determine) whether or
> not the condition is permanent, the status code "404 Not Found" can
> be used instead.
>
> The "410 Gone" response is primarily intended to assist the task of
> web maintenance by notifying the recipient that the resource is
> intentionally unavailable and that the server owners desire that
> remote links to that resource be removed. Such an event is common
> for limited-time, promotional services and for resources belonging
> to individuals no longer working at the server's site. It is not
> necessary to mark all permanently unavailable resources as "gone"
> or to keep the mark for any length of time -- that is left to the
> discretion of the server owner.

<cite>First appears in [draft-ietf-http-v10-spec-00 Section 6.2.3](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-http-v10-spec-00#section-6.2.3)</cite>
