---
# Index
hidden: True
url: /error/416.html
weight: 416
# Metadata
title: Range Not Satisfiable
subtitle: HTTP/1.1 416 Range Not Satisfiable
# Originally Appeared in draft-ietf-http-v11-spec-rev-01
date: 1997-11-21
---

> ## 4.4.  416 Range Not Satisfiable
>
> The 416 (Range Not Satisfiable) status code indicates that none of
> the ranges in the request's Range header field (Section 3.1) overlap
> the current extent of the selected resource or that the set of ranges
> requested has been rejected due to invalid ranges or an excessive
> request of small or overlapping ranges.
>
> For byte ranges, failing to overlap the current extent means that the
> first-byte-pos of all of the byte-range-spec values were greater than
> the current length of the selected representation.  When this status
> code is generated in response to a byte-range request, the sender
> SHOULD generate a Content-Range header field specifying the current
> length of the selected representation (Section 4.2).
>
> For example:
> ```
> HTTP/1.1 416 Range Not Satisfiable
> Date: Fri, 20 Jan 2012 15:41:54 GMT
> Content-Range: bytes */47022
> ```
>
> Note: Because servers are free to ignore Range, many
> implementations will simply respond with the entire selected
> representation in a 200 (OK) response.  That is partly because
> most clients are prepared to receive a 200 (OK) to complete the
> task (albeit less efficiently) and partly because clients might
> not stop making an invalid partial request until they have
> received a complete representation.  Thus, clients cannot depend
> on receiving a 416 (Range Not Satisfiable) response even when it
> is most appropriate.

<cite>From [RFC 7233 Section 4.4](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7233#section-4.4)</cite>

> ## 10.4.17 416 Requested range not satisfiable
>
> A server SHOULD return a response with this status code if a request
> included a Range request-header field (section 14.36) , and none of the
> range-specifier values in this field overlap the current extent of the
> selected resource, and the request did not include an If-Range request-
> header field.  (For byte-ranges, this means that the first-byte-pos of
> all of the byte-range-spec values were greater than the current length
> of the selected resource.)
>
> When this status code is returned for a byte-range request, the response
> MUST include a Content-Range entity-header field specifying the current
> length of the selected resource (see section 14.17).  This response MUST
> NOT use the multipart/byteranges content-type.

<cite>First appears in [draft-ietf-http-v11-spec-rev-01 Section 10.4.17](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-http-v11-spec-rev-01#section-10.4.17)</cite>

> ## 416 None Acceptable
>
> This status code is reserved for future use by a planned content
> negotiation mechanism.  HTTP/1.1 user agents receiving a 416 response
> which includes a Location header can treat this response as they would
> treat a 303 (See Other) response. If no Location header is included, the
> appropriate action is to display the entity enclosed in the response to
> the user.

<cite>First allocated in [draft-ietf-http-v11-spec-02 Section 9.4](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-http-v11-spec-02#section-9.4)</cite>
